A queue is a linear list of elements in which deletions can take place only at one end, called front, and insertions can take place at other end, called the rear.The terms "front" and "rear" are used in describing a linear list only when it is implemented as a queue. 
Queues are also called first-in-last-out lists,since the first element in a queue will be the first element out of the queue. In other words, the order in which enter the queue is the order in which they leave,This contrasts with stacks,which are last-in-first-out(LIFO) lists.
Queues may be represented in the computer in various ways, usually by means at one-way lists or linear arrays. Unless otherwise stated or implied. each of our queues will be maintained by a linear array QUEUE and two pointer variables: FRONT, containing the location of the front element of the queue; and REAR, containing .the location of 1he rear element of the queue. The condition FRONT= NULL will indicate that the queue is empty.
The basic operations that can be performed on a queue are: Enqueue: Insert an element at the rear of the queue. Dequeue: Remove an element from the front of the queue.Peek: Get the element at the front of the queue without removing it.IsEmpty: Check if the queue is empty.IsFull: Check if the queue is full (in array-based implementations)
Queues abound in everyday life. The automobiles waiting to pass through an intersection:form a queue, in which the first car in line is the first car through; the people waiting in line at a bank form a queue, where the first person in line is the first person to oe waited on; and so on. An important example of a queue in computer science occurs in a timesharing system, in which programs with the same priority form a queue while waiting to,be executed.
A circular queue is a variation of a regular queue in which the last element is connected to the first element, forming a circular structure. This allows the queue to wrap around and reuse empty spaces, making it more efficient in terms of space utilization compared to a regular queue.
A priority queue is a collection of elements such that each element has been assigned· a priority and such that the order in which elements are deleted and processed comes from the following rules: (1) An element of higher prionty is processed before any element of lower priority. (2) Two elements with the same priority are processed according to the order in which they were added to the queue.
Let n be the number of elements in the queue: Space Complexity (for n EnQueue operations)  O(n) Time Complexity of EnQueue()  O(1) Time Complexity of DeQueue()   O(1)
A deque (pronounced either "deck" or ''dequeue"} is a linear list in which elements can be added or removed at either end but not in the middle. The term deque is a contraction of the name double-ended queue.
Let SI and S2 be the two stacks to be used in the implementation of queue. All we have to do is to define the EnQueue and DeQueue operations for the queue.EnQueue Algorithm  •     Just push on to stack S1 DeQueue Algorithm •   If stack S2 is not empty then pop from S2 and return that element. •  If stack is empty, then transfer all elements from SI to S2 and pop the top element from S2 and return that popped element [we can optimize the code a little by transferring only n – 1 elements from SI to S2 and pop the nth element from SI and return that popped element].•  If stack S1 is also empty then throw error.
Yes, it’s possible to create a hybrid data structure that combines both features. i) Maintain a circular buffer (queue) to store elements. ii) Each element in the queue should have an associated priority value. iii) When enqueuing an element, insert it at the appropriate position based on its priority. iv) When dequeuing, remove the element with the highest priority. v) If the queue is full, consider overwriting the lowest-priority element.
